---
title: <The Effects of Carbon Dioxide on Agriculture>
layout: default
nav_order: 1
---

# The Effects of Carbon Dioxide on Agriculture

This claim is titled “The Interactive Effects of CO<sub>2</sub> and Light Intensity on Lettuce Growth” and can be found on the CO<sub>2</sub> Science website (Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global Change., 2021). The website is owned by The Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global Change and is known for being a climate change denier website (Greenpeace, 2021). This particular article makes the case that rising atmospheric CO<sub>2</sub> concentrations are enhancing plant growth worldwide, by citing a research article that has found that lettuce is positively impacted by elevated CO<sub>2</sub> levels and increased light intensity in a greenhouse (Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global Change., 2021). This claim was interesting because it was quoting a scientific article which has data to reinforce their statement. This makes the statement that lettuce is positively impacted by an elevated level of CO<sub>2</sub> believable, and it is likely true (Esmaili et al., 2020). However, the website used this data to indirectly state that increased CO<sub>2</sub> concentrations are beneficial to agriculture, while ignoring the other negative effects of climate change.

While both the claim and paper it was citing mentioned that this increased CO<sub>2</sub> concentrations were useful in the greenhouse industry, the claim chose to ignore the other factors related to crop growth and climate change (Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global Change., 2021; Esmaili et al., 2020). Climate change will cause increased precipitation rates and temperatures in many regions around the world, both of which will have significant impact on crop growths (Gupta et al., 2020). In fact, studies have shown that climate change has begun to reduce cop yields by 1-2% per decade over the past century, and these negative effects are expected to increase in the future (Wiebe et al., 2015). So, while current research does suggest that crops could positively respond to increased CO<sub>2</sub> concentrations in the absence of climate change, its associated impacts make it unlikely that crop yields will flourish (Fischer et al., 2005). 

There are many negative effects due to climate change that the claim had chosen to ignore, in order to make it appear more feasible to their audience. Climate change will cause an increase in temperature, which will reduce crop quality, alter the phenology of the crops, and decrease crop yields (Pathak et al., 2018). There will also be an increase in precipitation in some regions, which will cause the stunting of plant growth due to nutrient leaching, an increased risk of oxygen depletion in the soil, and cause a delay in crop plantings (Pathak et al., 2018). Climate change may also cause various extreme events to occur, which will all have negative impacts on the agricultural industry. The possibilities of heat waves will increase, which will cause early bolting in annual crops, reduced pollination success, and reduced photosynthesis which will lead to a decrease in plant growth and overall quality of the harvested product (Pathak et al., 2018). Droughts may become more frequent with climate change, which will cause severe yield losses and an increased possibility of insect and disease problems (Pathak et al., 2018). On the other hand, extreme flooding can cause water logging, lower oxygen levels, and lower light, damaging crops (Pathak et al., 2018). 

The negative impacts of climate change on agricultural crops will likely cause more problems than any positive impacts from elevated CO<sub>2</sub> concentrations (Fischer et al., 2005). The claim had conveniently did not mention these negative impacts, to assure their readers that an increased CO<sub>2</sub> concentration would be beneficial to the crops and that they should not worry about climate change. The reference to a scientific article adds to the strength of the article’s argument, but the limited consideration of the impacts of climate change makes the conclusion flawed.

## References

Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global Change., 2021. *The Interactive Effects of CO2 and Light Intensity on Lettuce Growth.* [online] CO2 Science. Available at: <ht<span>tp://w<span>ww.co2science.org/articles/V24/feb/a1.php> [Accessed 6 Feb. 2021].
  
Esmaili, M., Aliniaeifard, S., Mashal, M., Ghorbanzadeh, P., Seif, M., Gavilan, M.U., Carrillo, F.F., Lastochkina, O. and Li, T., 2020. CO2 enrichment and increasing light intensity till a threshold level, enhance growth and water use efficiency of lettuce plants in controlled environment. *Notulae Botanicae Horti Agrobotanici Cluj-Napoca*, 48(4), pp.2244–2262.

Fischer, G., Shah, M., N. Tubiello, F. and van Velhuizen, H., 2005. Socio-economic and climate change impacts on agriculture: an integrated assessment, 1990–2080. *Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences*, 360(1463), pp.2067–2083.

Greenpeace, 2021. *Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global Change (CO2 Science)*. [online] Greenpeace USA. Available at: <h<span>ttps://w<span>ww.greenpeace.org/usa/global-warming/climate-deniers/front-groups/center-for-the-study-of-carbon-dioxide-and-global-change/> [Accessed 6 Feb. 2021].
  
Gupta, A.K., Yadav, D., Gupta, P., Ranjan, S., Gupta, V. and Badhai, S., 2020. Effects of climate change on Agriculture. *Food and Agriculture Spectrum Journal*, [online] 1(3). Available at: <ht<span>tps://w<span>ww.foodagrispectrum.org/index.php/fasj/article/view/66> [Accessed 6 Feb. 2021].
  
Pathak, T.B., Maskey, M.L., Dahlberg, J.A., Kearns, F., Bali, K.M. and Zaccaria, D., 2018. Climate Change Trends and Impacts on California Agriculture: A Detailed Review. *Agronomy*, 8(3), p.25.

Wiebe, K., Lotze-Campen, H., Sands, R., Tabeau, A., Mensbrugghe, D. van der, Biewald, A., Bodirsky, B., Islam, S., Kavallari, A., Mason-D’Croz, D., Müller, C., Popp, A., Robertson, R., Robinson, S., Meijl, H. van and Willenbockel, D., 2015. Climate change impacts on agriculture in 2050 under a range of plausible socioeconomic and emissions scenarios. *Environmental Research Letters*, 10(8), p.085010.
